Network Working Group                                            T. Sato
Internet-Draft                                           MyAuberge K.K.
Intended status: Standards Track                         30 June 2026
Expires: 30 December 2026


   The Resource Governance Protocol (RGP) for Agentic AI Systems
                      draft-sato-soos-rgp-00

Abstract

   An AI agent that can act on resources cannot be governed unless
   those resources declare what they can do, under what constraints,
   and at what trust level -- before the agent acts.  Existing
   resource description standards (digital twin profiles, capability
   catalogs, API registries) provide no governance envelope: they
   declare capability but not compliance posture, trust attestation,
   or mandate-scope compatibility.  An agent that proceeds without
   this information may assign tasks to resources that are outside
   its mandate, below its required trust threshold, or unable to
   satisfy its compliance obligations.

   This document specifies the Resource Governance Protocol (RGP):
   a two-stage discovery and declaration protocol by which physical
   resources, digital services, and AI model instances declare their
   capability class, trust level, operational constraints, and
   current availability state to a governed AI agent operating under
   a Mandate JWT [I-D.sato-soos-mjwt].  Stage 1 delivers a
   capability fingerprint via a well-known URI; Stage 2 delivers a
   full governance envelope for mandate-scope validation and Resource
   Map Sovereign Object construction.  RGP defines eight capability
   classes (CAP-COMP through CAP-EXP), four trust levels (TRUST-0
   through TRUST-3), a session-scoped Resource Map Sovereign Object,
   a three-condition autonomous fallback test, and normative
   integration with the Agent Execution Protocol [I-D.sato-soos-aep],
   the Governance Audit Record [I-D.sato-soos-gar], and the Human
   Escalation Mechanism [I-D.sato-soos-hem].

   RGP also defines an AI Model Capability Declaration (RGP-Model)
   for the governance of AI model instances as first-class resources
   within a SOOS-governed deployment, and a Physical Resource Profile
   (RGP-Physical) for normative binding to existing digital twin
   standards.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current
   Internet-Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents
   at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 30 December 2026.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2026 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
     1.1.  Use Case: Activity Travel Supplier Discovery
     1.2.  Use Case: Emergency Resource Capacity Discovery
     1.3.  Use Case: Enterprise Procurement Agent
     1.4.  Relationship to SOOS
   2.  What RGP Is and Is Not
     2.1.  What RGP Does
     2.2.  What RGP Does Not Do
     2.3.  The Division of Labor
     2.4.  The Capability Declaration Analogy
   3.  How RGP Works
     3.1.  Use Case: Operator Deploying a SOOS-Governed Booking Agent
     3.2.  Use Case: Regulator Auditing Resource Assignment Decisions
     3.3.  Use Case: Developer Integrating a New Resource Class
     3.4.  Use Case: Cross-Trust-Level Fallback Scenario
   4.  Conventions and Definitions
   5.  Architecture Overview
     5.1.  RGP Position in the SOOS Stack
     5.2.  Two-Stage Discovery Model
     5.3.  Relationship to AEP and MAD
   6.  Capability Classes
   7.  Resource Declaration Schema -- Governance Envelope
     7.1.  Trust Levels
     7.2.  Governance Dimensions
     7.3.  Stage 1 Fingerprint Schema
     7.4.  Stage 2 Full Declaration Schema
   8.  Stage 1 -- Fingerprint Discovery
     8.1.  Well-Known URI
     8.2.  Request Format
     8.3.  Response Format
     8.4.  Freshness Rules
   9.  Stage 2 -- Full Declaration
     9.1.  Retrieval
     9.2.  Attestation Requirements by Trust Level
     9.3.  Validation Procedure
   10. Resource Map Sovereign Object
     10.1. Session Scope
     10.2. Resource Map Schema
     10.3. Assignment Validation
     10.4. GAR Integration
   11. RGP-Model -- AI Model Capability Declaration
     11.1. Two-Layer Model
     11.2. Discovery
     11.3. Mandate-Scoped Capability
   12. RGP-Physical -- Digital Twin Binding
     12.1. AAS v3.0 Binding
     12.2. W3C WoT Thing Description 1.1 Binding
     12.3. OPC UA Binding
     12.4. DTDL v3 Binding
   13. Fallback and Re-Routing
     13.1. Three-Condition Autonomous Fallback Test
     13.2. HEM Escalation Map
     13.3. GAR Recording
   14. ATP Profile Integration
     14.1. CAP-EXP Capability Class
     14.2. Ponyhouse Farm Reference Implementation
     14.3. ATP Profile Document Model
   15. Open Issues
   16. Security Considerations
     16.1. Stage 1 Fingerprint Spoofing
     16.2. TRUST-3 Resource Misrepresentation
     16.3. Resource Map SO Integrity Violation
     16.4. Fallback Boundary Bypass
   17. Privacy Considerations
   18. IANA Considerations
     18.1. RGP Capability Class Registry
     18.2. RGP Trust Level Registry
     18.3. RGP ALE Type Registry
     18.4. Well-Known URI Registration
   19. References
     19.1. Normative References
     19.2. Informative References
   Appendix A.  Worked Example -- Enterprise Procurement Discovery
   Appendix B.  Related Work
     B.1.  Existing Resource Description Standards
     B.2.  Regulatory Instruments
     B.3.  SOOS Companion Drafts

Author's Address


1.  Introduction

   Before an agent can be held accountable for its resource choices,
   those resources must have declared what they are capable of doing,
   under what governance constraints they operate, and whether they are
   currently available to accept assignment.  Without a normative
   declaration layer, a governed agent faces a resource landscape it
   cannot reason about: it may assign tasks to a resource that is
   outside the scope of its mandate, below the trust threshold its
   principal requires, or unable to satisfy the compliance obligations
   the deployment demands.

   Existing resource description standards provide capability without
   governance.  Digital twin specifications such as the Asset
   Administration Shell (AAS) v3.0, W3C WoT Thing Description 1.1,
   OPC UA, and DTDL v3 define rich schemas for what a resource can do
   -- but not whether it has been attested to a required trust level,
   whether its cost model fits within the agent's mandate budget, or
   whether its compliance posture is compatible with the applicable
   CAP profile.  AI model capability registries describe what a model
   can do in isolation -- but not what it may do under a specific
   mandate scope.  API registries provide endpoint discovery -- but
   not governance envelope validation.

   This document specifies the Resource Governance Protocol (RGP):
   a two-stage protocol that fills this gap.  Stage 1 delivers a
   lightweight capability fingerprint that an agent can query before
   any session resource assignment; Stage 2 delivers the full
   governance envelope that the kernel validates against the agent's
   active mandate before assignment proceeds.  The result is a
   Resource Map Sovereign Object: a session-scoped, kernel-signed
   record of every resource available to the agent, the governance
   state of each, and the fallback structure pre-declared for each
   critical sub-goal.

   This document is published on the SOOS Project web site at
   https://soosproject.ai/drafts/rgp.

1.1.  Use Case: Activity Travel Supplier Discovery

   An online travel platform deploys a SOOS-governed booking agent
   to fulfill multi-day activity itineraries on behalf of individual
   travelers.  The agent holds a Mandate JWT authorizing it to book
   experiential activities (CAP-EXP) within a defined budget and
   geographic scope.  Before constructing an itinerary, the agent
   must identify which of the platform's registered suppliers can
   accept assignment for each itinerary day.

   Ponyhouse Farm, an organic farm and activity supplier operating
   under the Activity Travel Protocol [ATP-ARCH], exposes an RGP
   Stage 1 fingerprint at /.well-known/soos-rgp.  The fingerprint
   declares capability class CAP-EXP, trust level TRUST-1 (attested
   by the ATP supplier registry), current availability state AVAILABLE
   for the requested date window, and a full_declaration_uri pointing
   to the Stage 2 governance envelope.  The booking agent queries the
   Stage 1 fingerprint, validates trust level against its mandate's
   minimum trust requirement, and -- on confirmation -- retrieves the
   Stage 2 declaration for Resource Map construction.

   Without RGP, the booking agent has no normative basis for
   confirming that Ponyhouse Farm's current availability is kernel-
   validated, that its trust attestation is current, or that its cost
   model fits within the mandate budget -- before a booking commitment
   is made.

1.2.  Use Case: Emergency Resource Capacity Discovery

   A government emergency management agency deploys a SOOS-governed
   multi-agent system to coordinate resource allocation during a
   declared major emergency.  A master agent, operating under an
   emergency response mandate, must discover available shelter
   capacity across municipal facilities before routing displaced
   persons.  Capacity state changes rapidly: facilities reach
   capacity, access roads are blocked, and compliance obligations
   (data minimization, duty of care reporting) vary by facility
   operator.

   Each participating municipal facility exposes an RGP Stage 1
   fingerprint at /.well-known/soos-rgp.  The fingerprint carries:
   capability class CAP-HUMAN (human-in-the-loop coordination
   resource), trust level TRUST-1 (attested by the agency's
   registered attestation authority), current availability state
   (AVAILABLE or AT_CAPACITY), and the compliance declarations
   applicable to personal data handling under the deployment
   jurisdiction's data protection framework.

   The master agent constructs a Resource Map SO from the queried
   fingerprints, recording each facility's current state and
   compliance posture before any routing decision is taken.  If a
   facility becomes unavailable after Resource Map construction,
   the three-condition fallback test (Section 13.1) determines
   whether the agent may autonomously reroute or must escalate
   to a human operator via HEM.

1.3.  Use Case: Enterprise Procurement Agent

   A procurement platform deploys a SOOS-governed agent to discover
   supplier API endpoints, current rate limits, and compliance
   declarations before initiating a sourcing workflow.  The agent
   holds a Mandate JWT authorizing it to interact with suppliers
   in a defined category (CAP-NET: network/API resources) and a
   defined budget envelope.

   Each registered supplier exposes an RGP Stage 1 fingerprint
   that declares: capability class (CAP-NET), current rate limit
   state (requests-per-minute remaining), compliance declarations
   (data residency, DPA signatory status), and trust level (TRUST-1
   for registry-attested suppliers, TRUST-2 for self-attested
   suppliers not yet in the registry).

   The procurement agent applies its mandate's minimum trust level
   requirement: TRUST-2 suppliers may be used for low-stakes
   discovery but not for transaction initiation.  The Resource Map
   SO records which suppliers are eligible for which operation
   classes under the active mandate -- creating a kernel-validated
   assignment basis before any supplier API is called.

1.4.  Relationship to SOOS

   RGP occupies the resource-facing layer of the SOOS execution
   architecture.  Its position in the dependency chain:

   KIA [I-D.sato-soos-kia]       -- provides XPID, GEC signing for
                                     Resource Map SO
   MJWT [I-D.sato-soos-mjwt]     -- Resource Envelope constrains
                                     Resource Map construction
   AEP [I-D.sato-soos-aep]       -- Resource Map SO is an AEP
                                     session artifact; RGP discovery
                                     precedes IDP intent declaration
   IDP [I-D.sato-soos-idp]       -- agent may not declare intent to
                                     use a resource before RGP
                                     discovery confirms it is
                                     mandate-compatible
   GAR [I-D.sato-soos-gar]       -- RGP ALEs (ALE-022 through
                                     ALE-029) feed the audit record
   HEM [I-D.sato-soos-hem]       -- DEC-RGP-08 fallback conditions
                                     trigger HEM-HIGH-1, HEM-PRE-2,
                                     or HEM-DS-1
   GRP [I-D.sato-soos-grp]       -- DEC-RGP-08 is adopted verbatim
                                     as the GRP FALLBACK action class
                                     normative boundary rule
   CAP [I-D.sato-soos-cap]       -- mandate-scope validation at
                                     assignment uses CAP profile;
                                     TRUST-3 resource use may be
                                     prohibited by CAP for specified
                                     capability classes

   RGP does not depend on ACD [I-D.sato-soos-acd].  ACD and RGP
   are parallel discovery protocols: ACD discloses the agent's
   compliance posture to a resource provider; RGP discloses the
   resource's capability and governance state to the agent.  Both
   may be exercised in sequence at the start of a governed
   interaction, but neither is a prerequisite for the other.


2.  What RGP Is and Is Not

2.1.  What RGP Does

   RGP is a governance-layer discovery protocol.  It enables a
   governed AI agent to obtain a machine-readable declaration of
   what a resource can do, under what constraints it operates,
   at what trust level it has been attested, and whether it is
   currently available to accept assignment -- before any
   assignment is made.

   RGP defines:

   -  A well-known URI (/.well-known/soos-rgp) at which any
      compliant resource exposes a Stage 1 fingerprint.

   -  A Stage 1 fingerprint schema: a lightweight declaration
      carrying capability class, trust level, and current
      availability state.

   -  A Stage 2 full governance envelope schema: a complete
      declaration of all nine governance dimensions, suitable
      for kernel validation against an active mandate.

   -  A Resource Map Sovereign Object: the session-scoped,
      kernel-signed artifact that records the agent's discovered
      resource landscape and assignment decisions for audit.

   -  A three-condition autonomous fallback test: the normative
      rule determining when an agent may reroute autonomously
      versus when it must escalate to a human operator.

   -  Two extended capability declaration profiles: RGP-Model
      (AI model instances as governed resources) and RGP-Physical
      (normative binding to existing digital twin standards).

2.2.  What RGP Does Not Do

   RGP does not perform booking, transaction initiation, or any
   write operation against the resources it discovers.  Discovery
   and declaration are read-only protocol operations.  The
   assignment of a task to a resource -- and the execution of that
   assignment -- is governed by AEP and the applicable Mandate JWT.

   RGP does not assess the substantive quality of a resource's
   work product.  A resource that declares CAP-EXP and TRUST-1 is
   attested to that class and level; whether its service is
   excellent or mediocre is outside the governance scope of this
   protocol.

   RGP does not replace ACD.  ACD is the agent's compliance
   disclosure to a resource provider.  RGP is the resource's
   capability declaration to the agent.  They are complementary
   discovery protocols, not alternatives.

   RGP does not define the content of CAP profiles.  Whether a
   TRUST-3 resource is prohibited for a specific capability class
   is a decision encoded in the deployment's CAP profile, not in
   this document.

   RGP does not govern inter-agent resource sharing.  A Resource
   Map SO constructed by one agent cannot be shared with a peer
   agent as a substitute for that agent's own RGP discovery.
   Each AEP session constructs its own Resource Map SO.

2.3.  The Division of Labor

   Three parties participate in the RGP governance model:

   -  Resource operators expose the well-known URI, maintain the
      Stage 1 fingerprint with current state, and publish the Stage
      2 governance envelope.  For TRUST-1 resources, the Stage 2
      declaration is co-signed by a registered attestation
      authority.

   -  The GEC (Governing Enforcement Component) validates the
      retrieved fingerprint and governance envelope against the
      agent's active Mandate JWT, constructs and signs the Resource
      Map SO, and enforces the three-condition fallback test at
      runtime.  The GEC makes no judgment about resource quality --
      only mandate compatibility.

   -  Attestation authorities (for TRUST-1 resources) issue
      attestation credentials that resource operators embed in
      their Stage 2 governance envelopes.  The attestation
      authority's role is analogous to a certificate authority in
      TLS: it vouches for identity and declared properties, not
      for service quality.

2.4.  The Capability Declaration Analogy

   In financial markets, a counterparty seeking to enter a
   transaction must first disclose its regulatory status, credit
   rating, and eligible instrument classes before a trading
   relationship is established.  No competent trading desk
   accepts a counterparty on the basis of self-declaration alone
   -- independent attestation is required, and the disclosure
   is verified before any position is opened.

   RGP applies the same principle to AI agent resource assignment.
   A resource that wishes to receive assignments from a governed
   agent must declare its capability class and compliance posture
   in a normative, machine-verifiable format before any assignment
   proceeds.  A TRUST-1 attestation in RGP plays the same role as
   an independent credit rating: it is not the resource's own claim
   about itself, but an independent authority's verification of
   that claim.  No one claims that a credit rating agency
   "decides" whether a trade happens -- only that it provides the
   attestation the market requires.  The same framing applies to
   RGP trust level attestation.


3.  How RGP Works

3.1.  Use Case: Operator Deploying a SOOS-Governed Booking Agent

   An operator deploying a SOOS-governed booking agent on behalf of
   a travel platform asks: "How do I configure my activity suppliers
   to be discoverable by my agent, and how do I know my agent will
   only assign tasks to suppliers that meet our trust requirements?"

   In an RGP-governed deployment, the operator registers their
   activity suppliers in a TRUST-1 attestation registry (such as
   the ATP supplier registry for CAP-EXP resources).  Each supplier
   exposes /.well-known/soos-rgp at their endpoint.  The operator's
   CAP profile specifies the minimum trust level for each capability
   class (e.g., CAP-EXP MUST be TRUST-1 or higher for transaction-
   initiating operations).

   When the booking agent begins an AEP session, it queries each
   candidate supplier's Stage 1 fingerprint, validates trust level
   and availability against the active mandate, and retrieves Stage
   2 envelopes for mandate-compatible suppliers.  The GEC
   constructs a Resource Map SO carrying only mandate-compatible
   suppliers.  The operator can inspect the Resource Map SO in the
   GAR audit record at any time to confirm that the agent's
   assignment decisions were based on kernel-validated resource
   governance data -- not self-reported supplier claims.

3.2.  Use Case: Regulator Auditing Resource Assignment Decisions

   A regulator investigating whether a governed AI agent made
   appropriate resource assignment decisions in a specific incident
   asks: "How can I determine which resources were available to the
   agent at the time of the assignment decision, and whether the
   chosen resource was within the agent's mandate scope?"

   In an RGP-governed deployment, every RGP discovery event is
   recorded as a GAR ALE.  ALE-022 (RGP_RESOURCE_MAP_CONSTRUCTED)
   records the session start and the full set of resources included
   in the Resource Map SO.  ALE-024 (RGP_RESOURCE_DISCOVERED)
   records each individual resource fingerprint query result.
   ALE-025 (RGP_RESOURCE_UNAVAILABLE) records resources that were
   queried but returned AT_CAPACITY or UNAVAILABLE.  ALE-026
   (RGP_FALLBACK_ACTIVATED) records each fallback activation, its
   trigger condition, and whether HEM escalation was invoked.

   The regulator can reconstruct the agent's complete resource
   landscape at session start from the GAR record, confirm that
   the selected resource was mandate-compatible at the time of
   assignment, and verify that fallback decisions followed the
   three-condition test.  No reconstruction from agent logs or
   system state is required -- the Resource Map SO and its
   associated ALEs constitute the authoritative record.

3.3.  Use Case: Developer Integrating a New Resource Class

   A developer adding a new resource class to a SOOS-governed
   deployment asks: "What do I need to implement to make my
   resource discoverable and mandate-compatible?"

   In an RGP-governed deployment, the developer implements two
   artifacts: (1) a Stage 1 fingerprint endpoint at
   /.well-known/soos-rgp returning the minimum required fields
   (resource_id, capability_class, trust_level, availability_
   status, valid_until); and (2) a Stage 2 governance envelope
   at a URI carried in the Stage 1 fingerprint's
   full_declaration_uri field, covering all nine governance
   dimensions defined in Section 7.

   For TRUST-2 resources, the developer self-signs the Stage 2
   declaration using the KIA conventions defined in
   [I-D.sato-soos-kia].  For TRUST-1 resources, the developer
   obtains attestation from a registered attestation authority
   before the resource will be considered eligible for assignment
   by agents whose mandates require TRUST-1.

   The developer does not need to modify the GEC, the agent, or
   the mandate structure.  RGP is an add-on declaration layer --
   resources that comply with the protocol become discoverable;
   resources that do not are treated as TRUST-3 (unattested)
   and subject to the deployment's CAP profile rules for TRUST-3
   assignment eligibility.

3.4.  Use Case: Cross-Trust-Level Fallback Scenario

   An operator who has configured minimum trust level TRUST-1 for
   CAP-EXP assignment faces the following situation: the designated
   primary resource (a TRUST-1 attested activity supplier) returns
   AT_CAPACITY for the requested date window; the only available
   fallback within capability class CAP-EXP is a TRUST-2 resource
   (self-attested, not yet in the attestation registry).

   Condition 1 of the three-condition fallback test (Section 13.1)
   requires that the fallback resource's trust level be equal to
   or higher than the unavailable resource's trust level.  TRUST-2
   is lower than TRUST-1.  Condition 1 fails.

   The GEC MUST NOT autonomously activate the TRUST-2 fallback.
   Instead, it MUST trigger HEM-HIGH-1 (Section 13.2): the
   principal is informed that the primary resource is unavailable,
   that the only available fallback is at a lower trust level than
   required, and that activation of the fallback requires explicit
   principal authorization.  The principal may authorize the
   TRUST-2 fallback for this session, or may instruct the agent
   to abandon the sub-goal.

   This scenario demonstrates that RGP's fallback boundary is not
   a convenience heuristic -- it is a normative constraint that
   prevents an agent from silently substituting a lower-governance
   resource when a higher-governance resource fails.


4.  Conventions and Definitions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL
   NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED",
   "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as
   described in BCP 14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when,
   they appear in all capitals, as shown here.

   This document uses the following terms:

   Resource:  Any entity -- physical device, digital service, AI
      model instance, or human-in-the-loop node -- that can receive
      task assignments from a governed AI agent.

   Capability Class:  A standardized taxonomy label (one of eight
      defined in Section 6) that categorizes the type of work a
      resource performs.  A resource declares exactly one primary
      capability class.

   Capability Fingerprint:  The Stage 1 response: a lightweight
      declaration carrying the minimum governance fields required
      for an agent to make a pre-assignment eligibility determination.

   Full Declaration:  The Stage 2 response: a complete governance
      envelope covering all nine governance dimensions defined in
      Section 7.2.

   Resource Map Sovereign Object (Resource Map SO):  The session-
      scoped Sovereign Object [I-D.sato-soos-sov] constructed by the
      GEC from Stage 1 and Stage 2 query results, carrying the
      complete set of mandate-compatible resources available to the
      agent for the current AEP session.

   Trust Level:  A four-value attestation scale (TRUST-0 through
      TRUST-3) defined in Section 7.1.  TRUST-0 is the highest trust
      level (kernel-generated); TRUST-3 is the lowest (unattested).

   Resource Envelope:  The budget and scope constraints carried in
      the agent's Mandate JWT [I-D.sato-soos-mjwt] within which the
      Resource Map SO is constructed.

   Attestation Authority:  A registered entity whose co-signature
      of a Stage 2 governance envelope confers TRUST-1 status on the
      resource.

   RGP-Physical:  The extension of RGP for physical resources
      declared via existing digital twin standards (AAS v3.0, W3C
      WoT, OPC UA, DTDL v3).

   RGP-Model:  The extension of RGP for AI model instances as
      governed resources within a SOOS deployment.

   Availability Status:  The current operational state of a
      resource: AVAILABLE, AT_CAPACITY, UNAVAILABLE, or
      MAINTENANCE.  Carried in the Stage 1 fingerprint.

   Staleness Bound:  The valid_until timestamp in the Stage 1
      fingerprint beyond which the fingerprint MUST NOT be used
      without re-querying.

   Three-Condition Fallback Test:  The normative rule defined in
      Section 13.1 (DEC-RGP-08) determining whether an agent may
      autonomously activate a fallback resource.


5.  Architecture Overview

5.1.  RGP Position in the SOOS Stack

   RGP occupies the resource-declaration layer between the agent's
   mandate (MJWT) and the agent's execution session (AEP).  It is
   invoked before IDP intent declaration: an agent MUST NOT declare
   intent to use a resource before RGP discovery has confirmed that
   resource is mandate-compatible for the current AEP session.

   The RGP position in the SOOS execution sequence:

   Principal issues MJWT with Resource Envelope
            |
            v
   AEP Session Open (XPID bound by KIA)
            |
            v
   +----------------------------------+
   |   RGP DISCOVERY LAYER           |
   |   Stage 1: fingerprint query    |
   |   /.well-known/soos-rgp         |  <- per candidate resource
   |   Stage 2: full declaration     |  <- for mandate-compatible
   |   Resource Map SO constructed   |  <- GEC signs, GAR ALE-022
   +----------------------------------+
            |                    \
            v  COMPATIBLE         v  NOT COMPATIBLE
   IDP intent declaration      Resource excluded from
   permitted for this          Resource Map SO; CAP
   resource (AEP PLAN)         profile determines if
                               HEM escalation required

   GEC enforces assignment   GAR records ALE-024 for
   against Resource Map SO   every queried resource

5.2.  Two-Stage Discovery Model

   RGP uses a two-stage discovery model to balance discovery
   efficiency against governance completeness:

   Stage 1 -- Fingerprint Discovery: A lightweight query to
   /.well-known/soos-rgp that returns the minimum governance
   fields required to determine mandate compatibility.  Stage 1
   is designed to be fast: a single HTTPS GET, a small JSON
   response, no attestation chain verification.  An agent
   querying ten candidate resources performs ten Stage 1 queries
   in parallel to quickly narrow the candidate set.

   Stage 2 -- Full Declaration: A complete governance envelope
   retrieval from the full_declaration_uri carried in the Stage 1
   fingerprint.  Stage 2 includes all nine governance dimensions,
   attestation chain for TRUST-1 resources, and compliance
   declarations.  Stage 2 is performed only for resources that
   pass Stage 1 mandate-compatibility screening, limiting the
   full-declaration overhead to the resources that will actually
   be assigned.

   The two-stage model is not optional.  An implementation that
   performs only Stage 1 discovery has an incomplete governance
   envelope and MUST NOT assign tasks based on Stage 1 data alone
   except for preliminary feasibility checks.  An implementation
   that bypasses Stage 1 and queries Stage 2 directly is
   conformant but inefficient.

5.3.  Relationship to AEP and MAD

   The Resource Envelope carried in the MJWT [I-D.sato-soos-mjwt]
   defines three constraints that bound Resource Map SO
   construction:

   (1)  Budget ceiling: the sum of cost_model values for all
        assigned resources MUST NOT exceed the mandate's resource
        budget.

   (2)  Capability class scope: if the MJWT restricts the agent
        to specific capability classes, the GEC MUST exclude
        resources of other classes from the Resource Map SO.

   (3)  can_decompose flag: if the MJWT's can_decompose field is
        false, the agent MUST NOT construct a Resource Map SO
        with more than one resource per sub-goal -- the mandate
        does not permit autonomous task decomposition across
        multiple resources.

   The Resource Map SO is an AEP session artifact.  It is
   constructed at AEP session open and closed at AEP session
   close (ALE-023: RGP_RESOURCE_MAP_CLOSED).  It MUST NOT
   persist across sessions.

   For MAD [I-D.sato-soos-mad] sub-agent scenarios: a sub-agent
   operating under a delegated MJWT constructs its own Resource
   Map SO from its delegated Resource Envelope.  The sub-agent
   MUST NOT inherit the parent agent's Resource Map SO.


6.  Capability Classes

   RGP defines eight capability classes.  Every resource that
   supports RGP declares exactly one primary capability class in
   its Stage 1 fingerprint.  A resource MAY declare secondary
   capability classes in its Stage 2 full declaration.

   The eight capability classes are:

   +-----------+--------------------------------------------------+
   | Class     | Scope                                            |
   +-----------+--------------------------------------------------+
   | CAP-COMP  | Computational resources: processors, inference   |
   |           | endpoints, cloud functions, batch compute.       |
   +-----------+--------------------------------------------------+
   | CAP-STOR  | Storage resources: databases, filesystems,       |
   |           | object stores, graph databases, vector stores.   |
   +-----------+--------------------------------------------------+
   | CAP-NET   | Network resources: APIs, webhooks, messaging     |
   |           | queues, streaming endpoints, protocol gateways.  |
   +-----------+--------------------------------------------------+
   | CAP-FAB   | Fabrication resources: physical manufacturing,   |
   |           | 3D printing, robotics, automated assembly.       |
   +-----------+--------------------------------------------------+
   | CAP-COMM  | Communications resources: human notification     |
   |           | channels, messaging systems, alert systems.      |
   +-----------+--------------------------------------------------+
   | CAP-TXN   | Transaction resources: payment systems,          |
   |           | contract execution, regulated settlement.        |
   +-----------+--------------------------------------------------+
   | CAP-HUMAN | Human-in-the-loop resources: human expert        |
   |           | queues, review workflows, approval authorities,  |
   |           | operator consoles.                               |
   +-----------+--------------------------------------------------+
   | CAP-EXP   | Experiential resources: hospitality, activity    |
   |           | tourism, bookable experiences, event venues.     |
   +-----------+--------------------------------------------------+

   Capability class registry: The eight classes above are the
   initial registry entries.  New classes are added by IETF
   consensus (see Section 18.1).  Deployment-specific sub-classes
   MAY be defined within an operator's namespace using the
   convention CAP-[CLASS]-[OPERATOR-TOKEN]; these sub-classes are
   not registered and carry no cross-deployment interoperability
   guarantee.

   AI model instances declare capability class CAP-COMP when used
   as inference compute resources.  The RGP-Model profile
   (Section 11) extends the Stage 1 and Stage 2 schemas with
   model-specific fields for resources that additionally declare
   the MODEL resource_type parameter.


7.  Resource Declaration Schema -- Governance Envelope

7.1.  Trust Levels

   RGP defines four trust levels.  Trust levels are ordered:
   TRUST-0 is the highest assurance level; TRUST-3 is the lowest.

   TRUST-0:  The resource is kernel-generated within the SOOS
      deployment.  No external attestation is required because the
      GEC itself is the authority.  Example: a sub-agent instance
      spawned by the master GEC.

   TRUST-1:  The resource has been attested by a registered
      attestation authority.  The Stage 2 governance envelope
      carries a co-signature from the attestation authority.
      Example: a supplier registered in the ATP supplier registry
      and attested under that registry's credential issuance
      policy.

   TRUST-2:  The resource is self-attested.  The Stage 2 envelope
      is signed by the resource operator using KIA-registered keys
      [I-D.sato-soos-kia], but no independent attestation
      authority has verified the declared values.

   TRUST-3:  The resource is unattested.  No signature is required
      or verified.  The GEC records the resource in the Resource
      Map SO as TRUST-3 and applies the deployment's CAP profile
      rules for TRUST-3 assignment eligibility.

7.2.  Governance Dimensions

   The Stage 2 full declaration covers nine governance dimensions:

   (1)  Capability class: primary and optional secondary classes
        from the registry in Section 6.

   (2)  Operational constraints: rate limits, concurrency limits,
        geographic restrictions, temporal windows during which
        the resource is available.

   (3)  Temporal commitment: the latency from assignment to first
        output; the minimum and maximum duration of a task
        assignment; cancellation terms.

   (4)  Exclusivity model: whether the resource can serve multiple
        simultaneous assignments or is exclusive per assignment.

   (5)  Compliance declarations: data residency, applicable data
        protection framework, DPA signatory status, sector-
        specific regulatory certifications.

   (6)  Cost model: the resource's pricing basis (per-call, per-
        token, per-minute, flat-rate) and the cost parameters
        required for Resource Envelope validation.

   (7)  Trust level: the trust level asserted by this declaration,
        with attestation credential URI for TRUST-1 resources.

   (8)  Current state: AVAILABLE, AT_CAPACITY, UNAVAILABLE, or
        MAINTENANCE, with estimated restoration time where known.

   (9)  Output DA-Type: the Sovereign Object type
        [I-D.sato-soos-sov] of the output this resource produces
        when assigned a task, enabling mandate-scope type checking.

7.3.  Stage 1 Fingerprint Schema

   The Stage 1 fingerprint is a JSON object.  The following fields
   are REQUIRED:

   resource_id:  String.  A URI uniquely identifying this resource
      instance.  MUST be stable across fingerprint refreshes for
      the same physical or logical resource.

   capability_class:  String.  One of the eight registered
      capability class identifiers (Section 6).

   trust_level:  String.  One of "TRUST-0", "TRUST-1", "TRUST-2",
      or "TRUST-3".

   availability_status:  String.  One of "AVAILABLE",
      "AT_CAPACITY", "UNAVAILABLE", or "MAINTENANCE".

   valid_until:  String.  ISO 8601 datetime.  The GEC MUST NOT use
      this fingerprint after valid_until without re-querying.

   The following fields are REQUIRED for TRUST-1 resources:

   attestation_authority_id:  String.  URI identifying the
      registered attestation authority that issued the co-
      signature on the Stage 2 declaration.

   The following field is REQUIRED when a Stage 2 declaration
   exists:

   full_declaration_uri:  String.  URI from which the Stage 2
      full governance envelope is retrievable.

   Example Stage 1 fingerprint (TRUST-1, CAP-EXP, Ponyhouse Farm):

   {
     "resource_id":
       "atp://ponyhouse.myauberge.jp/cap-exp/horse-trek",
     "capability_class": "CAP-EXP",
     "trust_level": "TRUST-1",
     "availability_status": "AVAILABLE",
     "valid_until": "2026-07-13T18:00:00Z",
     "attestation_authority_id":
       "https://registry.activitytravel.pro/attestation",
     "full_declaration_uri":
       "https://ponyhouse.myauberge.jp/.well-known/soos-rgp/full"
   }

7.4.  Stage 2 Full Declaration Schema

   The Stage 2 full declaration extends the Stage 1 fingerprint
   with all nine governance dimensions (Section 7.2).  For TRUST-1
   resources, the full declaration MUST be signed by the registered
   attestation authority identified in attestation_authority_id.
   For TRUST-2 resources, the full declaration MUST be self-signed
   using KIA-registered keys.

   The full declaration is a JSON object with the Stage 1 fields
   plus the following REQUIRED fields:

   operational_constraints:  Object.  MUST include: rate_limit
      (integer, requests per minute, 0 = unlimited),
      geographic_scope (array of ISO 3166-1 alpha-2 codes, empty
      array = unrestricted), temporal_windows (array of
      availability windows, empty = always available).

   compliance_declarations:  Object.  MUST include:
      data_protection_framework (string, e.g., "GDPR", "APPI",
      "CCPA", or "NONE"), data_residency_regions (array of
      ISO 3166-1 alpha-2 codes).

   cost_model:  Object.  MUST include: basis (one of "per-call",
      "per-token", "per-minute", "flat-rate", "none"),
      unit_cost (number, in the mandate's currency unit),
      currency (ISO 4217 code).

   temporal_commitment:  Object.  MUST include:
      min_assignment_duration_seconds (integer),
      max_assignment_duration_seconds (integer),
      cancellation_notice_seconds (integer).

   output_da_type:  String.  The Sovereign Object type produced
      by this resource on task completion.

   The following field is REQUIRED for TRUST-1 resources:

   attestation_signature:  String.  JWS compact serialization
      of the attestation authority's signature over the canonical
      JSON serialization of this declaration.


8.  Stage 1 -- Fingerprint Discovery

8.1.  Well-Known URI

   A resource that supports RGP MUST expose the following URI at
   its base endpoint:

      /.well-known/soos-rgp

   This URI is registered in the IANA Well-Known URI registry
   (Section 18.4).  The well-known URI MUST be accessible over
   HTTPS.  HTTP (non-TLS) access MUST be rejected with status
   code 400 and error code "tls_required".

8.2.  Request Format

   The Stage 1 discovery request is an HTTP GET to the well-known
   URI.  The following query parameters are defined:

   resource_type:  OPTIONAL.  If present, MUST be one of
      "PHYSICAL", "DIGITAL", or "MODEL".  A resource MAY use
      this parameter to return a type-specific fingerprint
      variant.  If absent, the resource returns its primary
      fingerprint.

   mandate_class:  OPTIONAL.  If present, carries the capability
      class the querying agent is interested in.  Resources MAY
      use this to return availability state specific to that
      class if they support multiple classes.

   Example request:

      GET /.well-known/soos-rgp?resource_type=PHYSICAL
          &mandate_class=CAP-EXP HTTP/1.1
      Host: ponyhouse.myauberge.jp
      Accept: application/soos-rgp-fingerprint+json

8.3.  Response Format

   A successful Stage 1 response MUST have HTTP status code 200
   and Content-Type: application/soos-rgp-fingerprint+json.

   The response body MUST be a valid Stage 1 fingerprint JSON
   object as defined in Section 7.3.

   Error responses:

   400 Bad Request: malformed query parameters.  Body MUST
      include error field with value "invalid_parameter".

   404 Not Found: the resource does not support RGP.  Agents
      SHOULD treat a 404 as a TRUST-3 resource signal and apply
      CAP profile rules accordingly.

   503 Service Unavailable: the resource is temporarily unable
      to serve fingerprint queries.  Agents SHOULD retry after
      the Retry-After interval if present.

8.4.  Freshness Rules

   The GEC MUST NOT use a Stage 1 fingerprint whose valid_until
   timestamp is in the past.  The GEC MUST re-query the Stage 1
   endpoint to obtain a fresh fingerprint.

   The GEC MAY cache a Stage 1 fingerprint for reuse within the
   same AEP session cluster for a duration not exceeding the
   minimum of: (a) the valid_until timestamp, and (b) 15 minutes
   from the time of first query.  The RECOMMENDED default cache
   window is 10 minutes.

   A cached fingerprint MUST be invalidated and re-queried before
   any task assignment if the resource's availability_status in
   the Resource Map SO is AT_CAPACITY or UNAVAILABLE, regardless
   of the cache window.


9.  Stage 2 -- Full Declaration

9.1.  Retrieval

   The Stage 2 full declaration is retrieved from the
   full_declaration_uri field in the Stage 1 fingerprint.  The
   retrieval request is an HTTP GET.  The response MUST have
   Content-Type: application/soos-rgp-declaration+json.

   Stage 2 retrieval is performed by the GEC, not the agent.
   The agent MUST NOT directly access the full_declaration_uri.

9.2.  Attestation Requirements by Trust Level

   TRUST-0:  No external attestation required.  The GEC validates
      the resource against its internal registry.

   TRUST-1:  The GEC MUST verify the attestation_signature field
      against the attestation_authority_id's published public key.
      Verification failure MUST cause the resource to be
      reclassified as TRUST-2 in the Resource Map SO, with
      ALE-027 (RGP_ATTESTATION_DOWNGRADE) recorded.

   TRUST-2:  The GEC MUST verify the self-signature against the
      resource_id's KIA-registered keys [I-D.sato-soos-kia].
      Verification failure MUST cause the resource to be
      reclassified as TRUST-3 in the Resource Map SO, with
      ALE-027 (RGP_ATTESTATION_DOWNGRADE) recorded.

   TRUST-3:  No signature verification.  The GEC records the
      declaration values as asserted but unverified.

9.3.  Validation Procedure

   After successful Stage 2 retrieval and attestation
   verification, the GEC MUST perform the following validation
   steps before including the resource in the Resource Map SO:

   Step 1:  Capability class check.  The resource's declared
      capability_class MUST be within the capability class scope
      of the active MJWT Resource Envelope.  If not, the GEC
      MUST exclude the resource from the Resource Map SO.

   Step 2:  Trust level check.  The resource's trust_level MUST
      meet the minimum trust requirement for its capability class
      as specified in the deployment's CAP profile.  If not, the
      GEC MUST exclude the resource and MAY record ALE-025
      (RGP_RESOURCE_UNAVAILABLE) with reason "trust_level_
      insufficient".

   Step 3:  Resource Envelope budget check.  The resource's
      cost_model unit_cost, added to the aggregate cost of all
      resources already in the Resource Map SO, MUST NOT exceed
      the MJWT Resource Envelope budget ceiling.  If it would,
      the GEC MUST exclude the resource.

   Step 4:  Compliance declaration check.  The resource's
      compliance_declarations MUST be compatible with the
      deployment's applicable jurisdiction requirements.
      Incompatible resources MUST be excluded.

   Step 5:  Availability check.  The resource's
      availability_status MUST be "AVAILABLE".  Resources with
      status AT_CAPACITY, UNAVAILABLE, or MAINTENANCE MUST be
      excluded from active assignment candidates but MAY be
      retained in the Resource Map SO as pre-declared fallback
      candidates with status noted.


10.  Resource Map Sovereign Object

10.1.  Session Scope

   The Resource Map Sovereign Object (Resource Map SO) is session-
   scoped.  One Resource Map SO is constructed per AEP session in
   which resource discovery is required.

   The Resource Map SO MUST be constructed by the GEC, not the
   agent.  The GEC MUST sign the Resource Map SO using KIA key
   material [I-D.sato-soos-kia] at construction time.

   The Resource Map SO MUST NOT be shared across AEP sessions.
   Each AEP session MUST construct its own Resource Map SO, even
   if sessions operate under the same MJWT mandate.

10.2.  Resource Map Schema

   The Resource Map SO carries:

   session_id:  String.  The AEP session identifier to which
      this Resource Map SO is bound.

   mandate_jti:  String.  The jti of the MJWT under which this
      Resource Map SO was constructed.

   constructed_at:  String.  ISO 8601 datetime of SO construction.

   resources:  Array.  Each entry represents one queried resource
      and carries: resource_id, capability_class, trust_level,
      availability_status at query time, mandate_compatible
      (boolean), exclusion_reason (string, present if
      mandate_compatible is false), fallback_candidate (boolean),
      and cost_model_summary.

   assignment_decisions:  Array.  Each entry records a resource
      assignment made during the session: resource_id, sub_goal_id,
      assigned_at, assignment_rationale.

   gec_signature:  String.  KIA signature over the canonical
      JSON serialization of the Resource Map SO.

10.3.  Assignment Validation

   Before assigning a task to a resource, the GEC MUST:

   (1)  Verify that the resource appears in the Resource Map SO
        with mandate_compatible: true.

   (2)  Verify that the resource's current availability_status
        is AVAILABLE (re-query Stage 1 if the cached fingerprint
        is stale per Section 8.4).

   (3)  Verify that adding this assignment's cost to the aggregate
        committed cost does not exceed the MJWT Resource Envelope
        budget.

   (4)  Record the assignment in the Resource Map SO
        assignment_decisions array.

   An assignment MUST be blocked and ALE-029 (RGP_ASSIGNMENT_
   BLOCKED) MUST be recorded if any of the above checks fails.

10.4.  GAR Integration

   The following GAR ALEs are defined for Resource Map SO
   lifecycle events:

   ALE-022:  RGP_RESOURCE_MAP_CONSTRUCTED.  Emitted at Resource
      Map SO construction.  Carries: session_id, mandate_jti,
      resource_count, mandate_compatible_count.

   ALE-023:  RGP_RESOURCE_MAP_CLOSED.  Emitted at AEP session
      close.  Carries: session_id, total_assignments,
      total_cost_committed.

   ALE-024:  RGP_RESOURCE_DISCOVERED.  Emitted for each resource
      queried.  Carries: resource_id, capability_class,
      trust_level, availability_status, mandate_compatible.

   ALE-025:  RGP_RESOURCE_UNAVAILABLE.  Emitted when a resource
      returns AT_CAPACITY, UNAVAILABLE, or MAINTENANCE, or fails
      mandate compatibility.  Carries: resource_id, reason.

   ALE-026:  RGP_FALLBACK_ACTIVATED.  Emitted at fallback
      activation (autonomous or HEM-escalated).  Carries:
      resource_id, sub_goal_id, trigger_resource_id,
      autonomous (boolean), hem_class (if HEM-escalated),
      condition_1_pass (boolean), condition_2_pass (boolean),
      condition_3_pass (boolean).

   ALE-027:  RGP_ATTESTATION_DOWNGRADE.  Emitted when a
      resource's attestation verification fails and its trust
      level is downgraded.  Carries: resource_id,
      declared_trust_level, effective_trust_level.

   ALE-028:  RGP_SO_INTEGRITY_VIOLATION.  Emitted when a post-
      construction modification to the Resource Map SO is
      detected.  Carries: session_id, violation_detected_at.

   ALE-029:  RGP_ASSIGNMENT_BLOCKED.  Emitted when an assignment
      is blocked by the GEC.  Carries: resource_id, sub_goal_id,
      block_reason.


11.  RGP-Model -- AI Model Capability Declaration

11.1.  Two-Layer Model

   AI model instances that participate in SOOS-governed multi-
   agent deployments as resources MUST declare their capabilities
   using the RGP-Model profile.  RGP-Model uses a two-layer
   capability model:

   Layer 1 -- Intrinsic capability: what the model can do
   independent of any deployment context.  Declared in the Stage
   2 full declaration under the model_intrinsic object.  Includes:
   reasoning_classes (array of registered reasoning class
   identifiers), context_window_tokens (integer), output_modalities
   (array, e.g., ["text", "code", "structured_json"]).

   Layer 2 -- Mandate-scoped capability: what the model MAY do
   under the current active mandate.  Derived by the GEC at
   session start by intersecting Layer 1 intrinsic capability
   with the MJWT mandate scope.  A model that intrinsically
   supports code generation but whose mandate does not include
   code generation authority MUST have that capability excluded
   from its mandate-scoped capability set.

11.2.  Discovery

   RGP-Model resources are discovered via the standard
   /.well-known/soos-rgp endpoint with the query parameter
   resource_type=MODEL.  The Stage 1 fingerprint for a MODEL
   resource carries the standard fields plus:

   model_id:  String.  REQUIRED.  A URI identifying the model
      version (e.g., "https://provider.example/models/v2.1").

   reasoning_class_summary:  Array.  REQUIRED.  A non-exhaustive
      list of up to three primary reasoning class identifiers from
      the RGP Reasoning Class Registry (Section 18, post-Vienna).

11.3.  Mandate-Scoped Capability

   The GEC MUST compute the mandate-scoped capability set for
   each MODEL resource in the Resource Map SO at session start.
   The mandate-scoped capability set is stored in the Resource
   Map SO alongside the resource entry and is used by the GEC
   at PLAN time to validate that the agent's intended use of
   the model is within both the model's intrinsic capability
   and the mandate scope.

   A model resource whose mandate-scoped capability set is empty
   (all intrinsic capabilities are excluded by the mandate) MUST
   be recorded in the Resource Map SO as mandate_compatible: false
   with exclusion_reason "mandate_scope_excludes_all_capabilities".


12.  RGP-Physical -- Digital Twin Binding

12.1.  AAS v3.0 Binding

   A physical resource that publishes an Asset Administration
   Shell (AAS) v3.0 Submodel MAY satisfy the Stage 2 full
   declaration requirement by providing an RGP-AAS Submodel
   that maps AAS Submodel elements to RGP governance dimensions.
   The normative field mappings for the RGP-AAS Submodel are
   under development (OQ-RGP-09, post-Vienna).  Implementations
   MUST include at minimum a capability_class field in the RGP
   well-known fingerprint even when the full declaration is
   served via AAS.

12.2.  W3C WoT Thing Description 1.1 Binding

   A resource that publishes a W3C WoT Thing Description 1.1
   MAY satisfy the Stage 2 full declaration requirement by
   including an RGP governance block in the Thing Description's
   @context extension.  The normative @context extension schema
   is under development (OQ-RGP-09, post-Vienna).

12.3.  OPC UA Binding

   A resource that publishes an OPC UA Information Model MAY
   satisfy the Stage 2 full declaration requirement by including
   an RGP Namespace node set in the OPC UA address space.
   The normative node set definition is under development
   (OQ-RGP-09, post-Vienna).  Vienna engagement with Qin Wu
   (NMOP WG) is planned to align the OPC UA and NMOP binding
   work with ITU-T Y.3090.

12.4.  DTDL v3 Binding

   A resource that publishes a Digital Twins Definition Language
   (DTDL) v3 model MAY satisfy the Stage 2 full declaration
   requirement by including an RGP component in the DTDL
   interface.  The normative component schema is under
   development (OQ-RGP-09, post-Vienna).

   For all four digital twin bindings: pending the normative
   field mappings, implementations MUST expose the RGP well-
   known URI and return at minimum a Stage 1 fingerprint
   independently of the digital twin standard used for the
   Stage 2 full declaration.


13.  Fallback and Re-Routing

13.1.  Three-Condition Autonomous Fallback Test (DEC-RGP-08)

   An agent MAY autonomously activate a fallback resource
   without HEM escalation if and only if ALL THREE of the
   following conditions are satisfied:

   Condition 1 -- Trust level parity or improvement:  The
      fallback resource's trust_level MUST be equal to or higher
      than the unavailable resource's trust_level.  An agent
      MUST NOT autonomously fall back to a lower-trust resource.

   Condition 2 -- Capability class coverage:  The fallback
      resource's capability_class MUST cover the sub-goal
      assigned to the unavailable resource.  An agent MUST NOT
      autonomously substitute a resource of a different capability
      class.

   Condition 3 -- Resource Envelope compliance:  The fallback
      resource's cost_model, combined with prior resource
      commitments in this session, MUST remain within the MJWT
      Resource Envelope budget.  An agent MUST NOT autonomously
      activate a fallback that would cause the session to exceed
      its mandate budget.

   All three conditions MUST be evaluated against current Stage 1
   fingerprint data (not cached data older than valid_until)
   at the moment of fallback activation.

13.2.  HEM Escalation Map

   If any condition of the three-condition test fails, the GEC
   MUST NOT autonomously activate the fallback.  The GEC MUST
   trigger HEM escalation with the class determined by the
   failing condition:

   +-------------------+------------------------------------------+
   | Failing condition | HEM class                                |
   +-------------------+------------------------------------------+
   | Condition 1       | HEM-HIGH-1: trust level decrease is a    |
   | (trust level)     | compliance risk the principal must accept |
   |                   | consciously.                             |
   +-------------------+------------------------------------------+
   | Condition 2       | HEM-PRE-2: confirmation required before  |
   | (capability class)| proceeding with a different action type. |
   +-------------------+------------------------------------------+
   | Condition 3       | HEM-DS-1: option presentation -- present |
   | (budget)          | available fallbacks and costs; let       |
   |                   | principal choose.                        |
   +-------------------+------------------------------------------+

   If more than one condition fails, the GEC MUST escalate with
   the highest-priority HEM class among the failing conditions,
   where HEM-HIGH-1 > HEM-PRE-2 > HEM-DS-1.

13.3.  GAR Recording

   ALE-026 (RGP_FALLBACK_ACTIVATED) MUST be recorded for every
   fallback activation event -- whether autonomous or HEM-
   escalated -- including the boolean pass/fail result for each
   of the three conditions.  This record constitutes the
   authoritative audit evidence of the fallback decision.

   GRP integration: DEC-RGP-08 (Section 13.1) is adopted
   verbatim as the normative FALLBACK action class boundary rule
   in the Governed Remediation Protocol [I-D.sato-soos-grp].
   GRP implementors MUST reference Section 13.1 of this document
   as the authoritative source for the three-condition test.


14.  ATP Profile Integration

14.1.  CAP-EXP Capability Class

   The CAP-EXP capability class (Section 6) is the registered
   RGP capability class for experiential resources: hospitality
   services, activity tourism, bookable guided experiences, and
   event venues.  CAP-EXP resources are the primary target of
   ATP Layer 2 [ATP-ARCH] Capability Declarations.

   The relationship between ATP Layer 2 and RGP for CAP-EXP
   resources is as follows:

   -  An ATP Capability Declaration (ATP Layer 2 Section S3)
      is the application-layer expression of a supplier's
      experiential offering: what activities it offers, in what
      configurations, at what prices.

   -  An RGP Stage 1 fingerprint from the same supplier is the
      governance-layer declaration: what capability class, what
      trust level, what current availability state, compatible
      with what mandate scope.

   -  An RGP Stage 2 full declaration provides the governance
      envelope that the GEC validates against the mandate before
      the ATP booking workflow is initiated.

   RGP discovery MUST precede ATP booking workflow initiation.
   An ATP booking workflow initiated without a current Resource
   Map SO entry for the target supplier is non-conformant with
   the SOOS governance architecture.

14.2.  Ponyhouse Farm Reference Implementation

   Ponyhouse Farm (ponyhouse.myauberge.jp), an organic farm and
   activity travel supplier operating under the Activity Travel
   Protocol [ATP-ARCH], serves as the reference implementation
   for the CAP-EXP capability class.

   Ponyhouse Farm's RGP implementation exposes:

   -  Stage 1 fingerprint at
      https://ponyhouse.myauberge.jp/.well-known/soos-rgp
      declaring capability_class: "CAP-EXP", trust_level:
      "TRUST-1" (attested by the ATP supplier registry at
      https://registry.activitytravel.pro/attestation).

   -  Stage 2 full declaration at
      https://ponyhouse.myauberge.jp/.well-known/soos-rgp/full
      covering all nine governance dimensions for the horse
      trek activity product.

   -  SO Type ATP_TRAVEL_ITINERARY [TO BE CONFIRMED: SO Type
      canonical name to be verified against KernelSpec v4.0.0
      SO Type Registry before Datatracker submission] as the
      output_da_type field in the Stage 2 full declaration.

   -  Compliance declarations: data_protection_framework: "APPI",
      data_residency_regions: ["JP"].

14.3.  ATP Profile Document Model

   Per DEC-RGP-11: the normative binding between the CAP-EXP
   capability class, the ATP Capability Declaration schema, and
   the RGP governance envelope fields is specified in a separate
   ATP-layer domain profile document [ATP-RGP-PROFILE] that
   references this document normatively.  This document (RGP)
   is not amended to include ATP-specific content beyond the
   reference implementation note in Section 14.2.

   The ATP-layer domain profile document [ATP-RGP-PROFILE] is
   under development by the ATP Foundation [ATP-CHARTER] and
   will reference draft-sato-soos-rgp as its governance
   infrastructure dependency.


15.  Open Issues

   The following open questions are explicitly deferred to a
   post-Vienna RGP working session.  Implementors SHOULD NOT
   make normative design choices that depend on the resolution
   of these OQs without consulting the SOOS Project.

   OQ-RGP-01:  Stage 1 fingerprint minimum schema completeness.
      The minimum required fields for a Stage 1 fingerprint are
      defined in Section 7.3.  Whether additional fields should
      be promoted to REQUIRED (e.g., full_declaration_uri,
      operational_constraints summary) is deferred.

   OQ-RGP-04:  Probabilistic capability expression for RGP-Model.
      Section 11 defines a deterministic capability class
      declaration for AI model instances.  Whether model
      capability declarations should support probabilistic
      confidence intervals (e.g., "reasoning_class X with
      confidence 0.87") is deferred.

   OQ-RGP-05:  Model capability drift signaling.  Whether a
      model resource should be able to signal mid-session
      capability degradation (context window saturation,
      performance drift) via an RGP availability update
      mechanism is deferred.

   OQ-RGP-06:  Stage 2 caching policy for high-frequency
      deployments.  The current protocol requires per-session
      Stage 2 retrieval for mandate compatibility validation.
      Whether a longer-lived Stage 2 cache with attestation
      currency verification is appropriate for high-frequency
      deployments is deferred.

   OQ-RGP-07:  RGP Reasoning Class registry completeness.
      The initial ten reasoning classes referenced in
      Section 11.1 require formal definition and registry
      structure.  Deferred to post-Vienna.

   OQ-RGP-09:  Normative digital twin field mappings.
      Sections 12.1 through 12.4 describe the direction of
      RGP-Physical bindings but do not provide normative field
      mappings.  The full normative binding tables for AAS v3.0,
      W3C WoT, OPC UA, and DTDL v3 require the research sweep
      (DR-RGP-01 S.8.2) as preparation and are deferred.

   OQ-RGP-10:  DNS-SD Stage 1 extension profile for local
      network deployments.  Section 5.2 notes that DNS-SD
      multicast is not appropriate as the normative baseline
      but is appropriate for KEE-1 L1 local deployments.
      The DNS-SD extension profile is deferred.

   OQ-RGP-12:  Attestation authority multi-signing for
      high-stakes capability classes.  Section 16.4 recommends
      2-of-3 attestation authority signing for L3 deployments.
      Whether this should be normative for specified capability
      classes (e.g., CAP-TXN, CAP-HUMAN) is deferred.


16.  Security Considerations

   This section identifies attack vectors against the RGP protocol,
   specifies normative defenses, and characterizes residual risk
   for each.  Security Considerations is authored before normative
   sections in accordance with [SOOS-MANUAL-v1.1] to ensure that
   attack surface analysis informs the normative protocol design.

16.1.  Stage 1 Fingerprint Spoofing

   Attack name: Stage 1 Fingerprint Spoofing

   Mechanism: An adversary intercepts or replaces the Stage 1
   fingerprint response from /.well-known/soos-rgp, substituting
   a malicious fingerprint that declares a higher trust level than
   the resource actually holds (e.g., TRUST-3 declared as TRUST-1),
   a false availability state (AT_CAPACITY declared as AVAILABLE),
   or a false capability class.  The agent proceeds with mandate
   validation and Resource Map construction based on fraudulent
   data.

   Normative defense:

   (1)  For TRUST-1 resources, the Stage 1 fingerprint MUST carry
        a signature from the registered attestation authority.
        The GEC MUST verify this signature before including the
        resource in the Resource Map SO.

   (2)  For TRUST-2 resources, the Stage 1 fingerprint MUST be
        self-signed by the resource operator using KIA-registered
        keys [I-D.sato-soos-kia].  The GEC MUST verify this
        signature.

   (3)  For TRUST-3 resources, the Stage 1 fingerprint carries no
        attestation.  The GEC MUST record the resource in the
        Resource Map SO with trust_level TRUST-3 and MUST apply
        the deployment's CAP profile rules for TRUST-3 assignment
        eligibility before any assignment is made.

   (4)  All Stage 1 queries MUST use TLS 1.3 [RFC8446] minimum.
        Certificate pinning SHOULD be applied for resources in
        production TRUST-1 deployments.

   Residual risk: A compromised attestation authority can produce
   fraudulent TRUST-1 attestations.  Deployment operators MUST
   implement attestation authority revocation per
   [I-D.sato-soos-kia] to bound exposure when an attestation
   authority is compromised.

16.2.  TRUST-3 Resource Misrepresentation

   Attack name: TRUST-3 Resource Misrepresentation

   Mechanism: A TRUST-3 resource (unattested) provides a Stage 2
   governance envelope that falsely declares compliance posture,
   cost model, or capability fields in order to gain assignment
   to tasks for which it is not qualified.  Because TRUST-3 carries
   no independent attestation, the GEC cannot verify the declared
   values against an external authority.

   Normative defense:

   (1)  The GEC MUST record every TRUST-3 resource in the Resource
        Map SO with a trust_level field explicitly set to TRUST-3.

   (2)  The deployment's CAP profile MAY prohibit TRUST-3 resource
        assignment for specified capability classes.  Where the CAP
        profile prohibits TRUST-3 assignment, the GEC MUST block
        assignment regardless of the resource's declared governance
        envelope.

   (3)  The GEC MUST record ALE-024 (RGP_RESOURCE_DISCOVERED) for
        every TRUST-3 resource queried, including the full Stage 1
        fingerprint received, enabling post-hoc auditor inspection
        of unattested resource queries.

   Residual risk: For capability classes where the CAP profile does
   not prohibit TRUST-3 assignment, the governance guarantee
   provided by the Resource Map SO is limited to the resource's
   self-declared values.  Deployment operators accepting TRUST-3
   resources MUST document this in their compliance posture.

16.3.  Resource Map SO Integrity Violation

   Attack name: Resource Map Sovereign Object Integrity Violation

   Mechanism: An adversary modifies the Resource Map SO after
   construction -- adding resources that were not mandate-compatible
   at discovery time, removing resources that failed availability
   checks, or altering assignment decisions -- to cause the agent
   to act on a resource landscape that differs from what the GEC
   validated.

   Normative defense:

   (1)  The Resource Map SO MUST be signed by the GEC using KIA
        key material [I-D.sato-soos-kia] at the time of
        construction (ALE-022).

   (2)  The GEC MUST verify the Resource Map SO signature at every
        assignment operation.  An assignment MUST be blocked if the
        signature fails verification.

   (3)  The Resource Map SO is an append-only structure.  Post-
        construction modifications to the SO MUST be treated as
        a governance violation and MUST trigger ALE-028
        (RGP_SO_INTEGRITY_VIOLATION), which feeds the GAR audit
        record.

   (4)  The Resource Map SO MUST NOT be shared across AEP sessions.
        Each AEP session MUST construct its own Resource Map SO
        from fresh RGP queries.

   Residual risk: A compromised GEC can sign a fraudulent Resource
   Map SO.  GEC integrity is governed by KEE-1 [I-D.sato-soos-kee]
   property P5 (GEC Manifest hash-lock) and P2 (FROST threshold
   signing at L2/L3).

16.4.  Fallback Boundary Bypass

   Attack name: Fallback Boundary Bypass

   Mechanism: An adversary causes a primary resource to return a
   false AT_CAPACITY or UNAVAILABLE state, triggering fallback
   evaluation.  A second adversary has pre-positioned a malicious
   fallback resource (false TRUST-1 declaration, false capability
   class coverage) in the Resource Map SO, expecting the agent
   to autonomously activate it when the primary appears unavailable.
   The bypass goal: cause the agent to assign a high-stakes task
   to a resource that bypasses the mandate's trust and capability
   constraints.

   Normative defense:

   (1)  Fallback candidates MUST be pre-declared in the Expected
        Outcome Declaration (EOD) [I-D.sato-soos-aep] before
        session start.  The GEC MUST NOT accept a fallback resource
        that was not pre-declared in the EOD as an autonomous
        fallback candidate.

   (2)  At autonomous fallback activation, the GEC MUST re-validate
        the fallback resource's Stage 1 fingerprint (freshness
        MUST be confirmed against valid_until) and MUST re-apply
        the three-condition test (Section 13.1) against the current
        Mandate JWT Resource Envelope.

   (3)  If any condition of the three-condition test fails against
        the fallback resource, the GEC MUST escalate via HEM before
        activation, regardless of whether the fallback was pre-
        declared in the EOD.

   (4)  ALE-026 (RGP_FALLBACK_ACTIVATED) MUST be recorded for every
        fallback activation, whether autonomous or HEM-escalated,
        including the trigger condition and the three-condition
        test result for each condition.

   Residual risk: A coordinated attack that compromises both the
   primary resource's availability signal and the attestation
   authority that issued the fallback resource's TRUST-1 credential
   cannot be defended by RGP alone.  Attestation authority
   multi-signing (analogous to KEE-1 P4 publisher key 2-of-3)
   for high-stakes capability classes is RECOMMENDED for L3
   deployments and is under consideration for a future RGP version.


17.  Privacy Considerations

   RGP discovery operations involve querying resource endpoints for
   governance declarations.  The following privacy considerations
   apply:

   Agent identity in Stage 1 queries:  Stage 1 GET requests to
   /.well-known/soos-rgp do not require agent authentication.
   However, the TLS session metadata visible to the resource
   operator (source IP, timing patterns) may be observable.
   Deployments with agent anonymity requirements SHOULD route
   Stage 1 queries through a GEC-operated discovery proxy.

   Resource Map SO data minimization:  The Resource Map SO records
   the governance state of all queried resources, including those
   that were excluded from active assignment.  The Resource Map SO
   is a session artifact and MUST be subject to the deployment's
   GAR data retention policy.  Resource identifiers in the
   Resource Map SO MUST NOT include personal data unless the
   resource_id URI scheme is explicitly designed to be privacy-
   preserving.

   ALE-024 logging:  ALE-024 (RGP_RESOURCE_DISCOVERED) is emitted
   for every queried resource.  For CAP-HUMAN resources that
   represent individual human experts, the resource_id in ALE-024
   MUST be a pseudonymous identifier, not the individual's name
   or personal data.

   Stage 2 compliance declarations:  The data_protection_framework
   field in Stage 2 full declarations states the applicable data
   protection instrument.  Agents operating under GDPR or APPI
   mandates MUST verify that any CAP-STOR or CAP-COMM resource
   assigned to personal data processing tasks declares a
   compatible data_protection_framework before assignment.


18.  IANA Considerations

18.1.  RGP Capability Class Registry

   This document requests IANA to establish a new registry
   "RGP Capability Classes" under the SOOS Protocol Parameters
   registry group.

   Registration procedure: IETF consensus.

   Initial entries:

   +----------+---------+----------------------------------+
   | Class ID | Status  | Description                      |
   +----------+---------+----------------------------------+
   | CAP-COMP | Current | Computational resources          |
   | CAP-STOR | Current | Storage resources                |
   | CAP-NET  | Current | Network resources                |
   | CAP-FAB  | Current | Fabrication resources            |
   | CAP-COMM | Current | Communications resources         |
   | CAP-TXN  | Current | Transaction resources            |
   | CAP-HUMAN| Current | Human-in-the-loop resources      |
   | CAP-EXP  | Current | Experiential resources           |
   +----------+---------+----------------------------------+

18.2.  RGP Trust Level Registry

   This document requests IANA to establish a new registry
   "RGP Trust Levels" under the SOOS Protocol Parameters
   registry group.

   Registration procedure: Standards Action.

   Initial entries:

   +---------+---------------------------------------------+
   | Level   | Description                                 |
   +---------+---------------------------------------------+
   | TRUST-0 | Kernel-generated; no external attestation   |
   | TRUST-1 | Attested by registered attestation authority|
   | TRUST-2 | Self-attested with KIA-registered keys      |
   | TRUST-3 | Unattested                                  |
   +---------+---------------------------------------------+

18.3.  RGP ALE Type Registry

   This document defines the following Governance Audit Record
   (GAR) ALE types for registration in the GAR ALE Type Registry
   [I-D.sato-soos-gar]:

   ALE-022:  RGP_RESOURCE_MAP_CONSTRUCTED
   ALE-023:  RGP_RESOURCE_MAP_CLOSED
   ALE-024:  RGP_RESOURCE_DISCOVERED
   ALE-025:  RGP_RESOURCE_UNAVAILABLE
   ALE-026:  RGP_FALLBACK_ACTIVATED
   ALE-027:  RGP_ATTESTATION_DOWNGRADE
   ALE-028:  RGP_SO_INTEGRITY_VIOLATION
   ALE-029:  RGP_ASSIGNMENT_BLOCKED

   Full ALE schemas (trigger conditions, mandatory fields, timing
   requirements) are defined in Section 10.4 of this document.

18.4.  Well-Known URI Registration

   This document requests IANA to register the following URI
   suffix in the Well-Known URI Registry [RFC8615]:

   URI Suffix:  soos-rgp
   Change Controller:  IETF
   Specification Document:  This document (Section 8.1)
   Related Information:  Used for RGP Stage 1 fingerprint
      discovery.  Returns application/soos-rgp-fingerprint+json.

18.5.  Media Type Registrations

   This document requests IANA to register the following media
   types:

   application/soos-rgp-fingerprint+json:  Stage 1 fingerprint
      response (Section 7.3, Section 8.3).

   application/soos-rgp-declaration+json:  Stage 2 full
      declaration response (Section 7.4, Section 9.1).


19.  References

19.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in
              RFC 2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, May 2017.

   [RFC8446]  Rescorla, E., "The Transport Layer Security (TLS)
              Protocol Version 1.3", RFC 8446, August 2018.

   [RFC8615]  Nottingham, M., "Well-Known Uniform Resource
              Identifiers (URIs)", RFC 8615, May 2019.

   [RFC7519]  Jones, M., Bradley, J., and N. Sakimura, "JSON Web
              Token (JWT)", RFC 7519, May 2015.

   [I-D.sato-soos-sov]
              Sato, T., "The Sovereign Object (SOV) for Agentic
              AI Systems", draft-sato-soos-sov-02, work in
              progress, July 2026.

   [I-D.sato-soos-kia]
              Sato, T., "Kernel Identity Architecture (KIA) for
              Agentic AI Systems", draft-sato-soos-kia-03, work
              in progress, July 2026.

   [I-D.sato-soos-mjwt]
              Sato, T., "The Mandate JWT (MJWT) for Agentic AI
              Systems", draft-sato-soos-mjwt-02, work in
              progress, July 2026.

   [I-D.sato-soos-aep]
              Sato, T., "The Agent Execution Protocol (AEP) for
              Agentic AI Systems", draft-sato-soos-aep-02, work
              in progress, July 2026.

   [I-D.sato-soos-idp]
              Sato, T., "The Intent Declaration Primitive (IDP)
              for Agentic AI Systems", draft-sato-soos-idp-05,
              work in progress, July 2026.

   [I-D.sato-soos-gar]
              Sato, T., "Governance Audit Record (GAR) for
              Agentic AI Systems", draft-sato-soos-gar-03, work
              in progress, July 2026.

   [I-D.sato-soos-hem]
              Sato, T., "The Human Escalation Mechanism (HEM) for
              Agentic AI Systems", draft-sato-soos-hem-05, work
              in progress, July 2026.

   [I-D.sato-soos-cap]
              Sato, T., "Constitutional AI Protocol (CAP) for
              Agentic AI Systems", draft-sato-soos-cap-04, work
              in progress, July 2026.

   [I-D.sato-soos-grp]
              Sato, T., "Governed Remediation Protocol (GRP) for
              Agentic AI Systems", draft-sato-soos-grp-00, work
              in progress, July 2026.

   [I-D.sato-soos-kee]
              Sato, T., "The Kernel Execution Environment (KEE-1)
              for the Sovereign Object OS", draft-sato-soos-kee-00,
              work in progress, July 2026.

   [I-D.sato-soos-acd]
              Sato, T., "Agent Compliance Disclosure (ACD) for
              Agentic AI Systems", draft-sato-soos-acd-00, work
              in progress, July 2026.

   [I-D.sato-soos-mad]
              Sato, T., "Multi-Agent Delegation (MAD) for Agentic
              AI Systems", draft-sato-soos-mad-03, work in
              progress, July 2026.

19.2.  Informative References

   [ATP-ARCH] Activity Travel Protocol Foundation, "Activity
              Travel Protocol Architecture Specification",
              Version 1.0, April 2026,
              https://activitytravel.pro/spec/architecture.html

   [ATP-CHARTER]
              Activity Travel Protocol Foundation, "ATP Foundation
              Charter", https://activitytravel.pro/spec/CHARTER.html

   [ATP-RGP-PROFILE]
              Activity Travel Protocol Foundation, "ATP-RGP
              Domain Profile: CAP-EXP Capability Class Binding",
              work in progress (post-Vienna).

   [AAS-V3]   Plattform Industrie 4.0, "Asset Administration Shell
              Part 1: The Exchange of Information between Partners
              in the Value Chain of Industrie 4.0", Version 3.0,
              2023.

   [WOT-TD]   W3C, "Web of Things (WoT) Thing Description 1.1",
              W3C Recommendation, https://www.w3.org/TR/wot-thing-
              description11/, December 2023.

   [EUAIA]    European Parliament, "Artificial Intelligence Act",
              Regulation (EU) 2024/1689, June 2024.

   [APPI]     Government of Japan, "Act on the Protection of
              Personal Information", Act No. 57 of 2003,
              as amended.

   [Windley-Loop]
              Windley, P., "It's Not Just What Agents Can Do...
              It's When They Can Do It!", windley.com, March 2026,
              https://www.windley.com/archives/2026/03/


Appendix A.  Worked Example -- Enterprise Procurement Discovery

   This appendix provides a complete end-to-end example of RGP
   discovery in an enterprise procurement scenario (Section 1.3).

A.1.  Scenario Setup

   A procurement platform operates a SOOS-governed sourcing agent.
   The agent holds a Mandate JWT with:

   -  capability_class_scope: ["CAP-NET"]
   -  minimum_trust_level: "TRUST-2"
   -  resource_budget: { amount: 1000, currency: "USD",
        basis: "per-session" }
   -  can_decompose: true

   Three candidate suppliers are registered in the platform's
   supplier directory:

   -  Supplier A: CAP-NET, TRUST-1 (registry-attested),
      unit_cost: 0.01 USD per-call
   -  Supplier B: CAP-NET, TRUST-2 (self-attested),
      unit_cost: 0.005 USD per-call
   -  Supplier C: CAP-NET, TRUST-3 (unattested),
      unit_cost: 0.001 USD per-call

A.2.  Stage 1 Discovery

   The GEC queries /.well-known/soos-rgp on all three supplier
   endpoints in parallel.

   Supplier A response:
   { "resource_id": "https://supplier-a.example/api",
     "capability_class": "CAP-NET", "trust_level": "TRUST-1",
     "availability_status": "AVAILABLE",
     "valid_until": "2026-07-13T16:00:00Z",
     "attestation_authority_id":
       "https://procurement-registry.example/attestation",
     "full_declaration_uri":
       "https://supplier-a.example/.well-known/soos-rgp/full" }

   Supplier B response:
   { "resource_id": "https://supplier-b.example/api",
     "capability_class": "CAP-NET", "trust_level": "TRUST-2",
     "availability_status": "AVAILABLE",
     "valid_until": "2026-07-13T16:00:00Z",
     "full_declaration_uri":
       "https://supplier-b.example/.well-known/soos-rgp/full" }

   Supplier C response:
   { "resource_id": "https://supplier-c.example/api",
     "capability_class": "CAP-NET", "trust_level": "TRUST-3",
     "availability_status": "AVAILABLE",
     "valid_until": "2026-07-13T16:00:00Z" }

   GAR: ALE-024 emitted for each supplier (3 ALEs total).

A.3.  Mandate Compatibility Screening

   Step 1 (capability class): All three are CAP-NET. Pass.
   Step 2 (trust level): Mandate requires TRUST-2 minimum.
      Supplier C is TRUST-3. Fail.
      GEC excludes Supplier C from active assignment candidates.
      ALE-025 emitted for Supplier C (reason: "trust_level_
      insufficient").
   Step 3 (budget): Suppliers A and B within budget. Pass.
   Step 4 (compliance): Both declare compatible frameworks. Pass.
   Step 5 (availability): Both AVAILABLE. Pass.

   Supplier C is retained in the Resource Map SO as a fallback
   candidate with mandate_compatible: false and exclusion_reason:
   "trust_level_insufficient".

A.4.  Stage 2 Retrieval

   The GEC retrieves Stage 2 full declarations for Supplier A and
   Supplier B.  Supplier A's attestation_signature is verified
   against the procurement registry's published public key.
   Supplier B's self-signature is verified against its KIA-
   registered keys.  Both verifications pass.

A.5.  Resource Map SO Construction

   The GEC constructs the Resource Map SO:

   -  session_id: "aep-session-procurement-20260713-001"
   -  mandate_jti: "mjwt-procurement-20260713"
   -  resources: [Supplier A (mandate_compatible: true),
        Supplier B (mandate_compatible: true),
        Supplier C (mandate_compatible: false,
          exclusion_reason: "trust_level_insufficient")]
   -  gec_signature: <KIA signature>

   GAR: ALE-022 emitted (resource_count: 3,
   mandate_compatible_count: 2).

A.6.  Assignment and PERMIT Path

   The sourcing agent, at AEP PLAN step, proposes assigning
   the primary discovery sub-goal to Supplier A (TRUST-1,
   lower per-call cost for high-volume discovery).  The GEC
   validates against the Resource Map SO: Supplier A is
   mandate_compatible: true, AVAILABLE, within budget.

   Assignment proceeds.  The Resource Map SO assignment_decisions
   array is updated.

A.7.  Fallback Scenario -- DENY Path

   During the session, Supplier A returns AT_CAPACITY.  The GEC
   evaluates the three-condition test for Supplier B as fallback:

   Condition 1: Supplier B is TRUST-2; Supplier A was TRUST-1.
      TRUST-2 < TRUST-1. Condition 1 FAILS.

   The GEC MUST NOT autonomously activate Supplier B.  The GEC
   triggers HEM-HIGH-1.  The principal is informed that Supplier
   A is at capacity, that the available fallback (Supplier B) is
   at a lower trust level than the primary, and that principal
   authorization is required to proceed.

   GAR: ALE-026 emitted (autonomous: false, hem_class:
   "HEM-HIGH-1", condition_1_pass: false, condition_2_pass: true,
   condition_3_pass: true).

   Principal authorizes Supplier B for this session.  The
   assignment proceeds under HEM authorization.


Appendix B.  Related Work

B.1.  Existing Resource Description Standards

   Asset Administration Shell (AAS) v3.0 [AAS-V3] provides a
   comprehensive digital twin submodel framework for industrial
   assets.  AAS describes rich asset properties but provides no
   governance envelope: no trust level attestation, no mandate-
   scope compatibility model, no fallback governance rule.  RGP-
   Physical (Section 12) provides a governance overlay for AAS
   without modifying the AAS specification.

   W3C Web of Things Thing Description 1.1 [WOT-TD] defines a
   schema for IoT resource capability declaration.  WoT Thing
   Descriptions describe affordances (actions, properties, events)
   but carry no compliance declarations, cost models, or trust
   attestation.  RGP Stage 2 is complementary: a WoT resource
   may satisfy Stage 2 via the RGP-Physical WoT binding
   (Section 12.2).

   AI model capability registries (MLflow, HuggingFace model
   cards) describe what a model can do in isolation but carry no
   mandate-scope capability model, no governance envelope, and
   no integration with a session-scoped assignment validation
   architecture.  RGP-Model (Section 11) fills this gap for
   AI model instances in SOOS-governed deployments.

   No existing standard combines: (1) governance envelope
   (trust level, compliance declarations, mandate-scope
   validation), (2) session-scoped assignment tracking, and
   (3) normative fallback boundary rule, for governed AI agent
   resource discovery.  RGP is the first specification to
   address all three together.

B.2.  Regulatory Instruments

   EU AI Act Article 13 (Transparency) requires that high-risk
   AI systems provide sufficient transparency for operators to
   understand the system's outputs and exercise appropriate
   oversight.  The Resource Map SO and its GAR ALEs provide
   the machine-readable record of resource discovery and
   assignment decisions that supports Article 13 compliance.

   GDPR Article 25 (Data protection by design and by default)
   requires that personal data processing is limited to what is
   necessary.  RGP's compliance_declarations field in Stage 2
   enables a GEC to verify data_protection_framework
   compatibility before assigning a data-handling task to a
   resource, supporting Article 25 by-design requirements.

B.3.  SOOS Companion Drafts

   KIA [I-D.sato-soos-kia]:  Provides the GEC signing key
   material used to sign the Resource Map SO.  RGP depends on
   KIA for all signature operations.

   MJWT [I-D.sato-soos-mjwt]:  The Resource Envelope in the
   MJWT bounds Resource Map SO construction.  RGP depends on
   MJWT as the authority source for mandate constraints.

   AEP [I-D.sato-soos-aep]:  The Resource Map SO is an AEP
   session artifact.  RGP discovery precedes AEP PLAN step
   resource assignment.

   IDP [I-D.sato-soos-idp]:  An agent MUST NOT declare intent
   to use a resource before RGP discovery confirms mandate
   compatibility.  RGP precedes IDP in the SOOS execution
   sequence.

   GAR [I-D.sato-soos-gar]:  RGP defines ALE-022 through
   ALE-029 as new entries in the GAR ALE registry.  GAR
   consumes RGP ALEs.

   HEM [I-D.sato-soos-hem]:  DEC-RGP-08 (Section 13.1)
   specifies which HEM class is triggered for each failing
   fallback condition.  HEM is consumed by RGP's fallback
   mechanism.

   GRP [I-D.sato-soos-grp]:  DEC-RGP-08 is adopted verbatim
   as GRP's FALLBACK action class normative boundary rule.
   GRP depends on RGP for the three-condition test definition.

   CAP [I-D.sato-soos-cap]:  CAP profile rules determine
   whether TRUST-3 resource assignment is permitted for a given
   capability class.  RGP depends on CAP for trust-level-based
   assignment prohibition.

   ACD [I-D.sato-soos-acd]:  ACD and RGP are complementary
   discovery protocols.  ACD discloses the agent's compliance
   posture to a resource; RGP discloses the resource's
   capability and governance state to the agent.  Neither
   depends on the other.

   MAD [I-D.sato-soos-mad]:  Sub-agents under MAD delegation
   construct their own Resource Map SOs from their delegated
   Resource Envelopes.  MAD is consumed by RGP's sub-agent
   session handling.

   SOV [I-D.sato-soos-sov]:  The Resource Map SO is a
   Sovereign Object instance.  RGP depends on SOV for the
   SO type framework.

   KEE-1 [I-D.sato-soos-kee]:  GEC signing integrity for the
   Resource Map SO is governed by KEE-1 properties P2 and P5.
   RGP depends on KEE-1 for GEC integrity guarantees.


Author's Address

   Tom Sato
   MyAuberge K.K.
   Chino, Nagano, Japan
   Email: tomsato@myauberge.jp
   URI:   https://soosproject.ai/drafts/rgp
